---
title: 1. The More Things Change, the More They Stay the Same
date: 2020-09-15
---

# Atom

```cicada
check "ratatouille": String

compute "ratatouille"
```

# Definition of Judgment

> A judgment is an attitude that a person takes towards expressions.
> When we come to know something, we are making a judgment.

Thus, about a judgment, we can say:

- we have reason to believe `____`.
- we have no reason to believe `____`.

# Definition of "Form of judgment"

> A form of judgment is an observation
> with blank spaces in it, such as
>
> `____ is a ____.`

# Pair

```cicada
check cons("ratatouille", "baguette"): Pair(String, String)
check refl: Equal(String, "ratatouille", "ratatouille")

check refl: Equal(
  Pair(String, String),
  cons("ratatouille", "baguette"),
  cons("ratatouille", "baguette")
)

check car(the(Pair(String, String), cons("ratatouille", "baguette"))): String

check refl: Equal(
  String,
  "ratatouille",
  car(the(Pair(String, String), cons("ratatouille", "baguette")))
)
```

# Definition of Type

Expressions that describe other expressions are called types.

- Xie: When we can say "x is P", that means "P" describe "x".

This definition of type is very simple,
with a leading question, it is even more natural.

# Type

```cicada
check Pair(String, String): Type
check String: Type
check Type: Type
check refl: Equal(Type, String, String)

check Pair(
  car(the(Pair(Type, String), cons(String, "olive"))),
  cdr(the(Pair(String, Type), cons("oil", String)))
): Type

check cons(
  cdr(the(Pair(Type, String), cons(String, "olive"))),
  car(the(Pair(String, Type), cons("oil", String)))
): Pair(
  car(the(Pair(Type, String), cons(String, "olive"))),
  cdr(the(Pair(String, Type), cons("oil", String)))
)
```

# The Four Forms of Judgment

```
(1)                   ____ is a ____.
(2)    ____ is the same ____ as ____.
(3)                   ____ is a type.
(4)  ____ and ____ are the same type.
```

Judgments are acts of knowing, and believing is part of knowing.

Judgments are sentences.

But, Sentences get their meaning from those who understand them.
The sentences capture thoughts that we have,
and thoughts are more important than the words we use to express them.

# Definition of Normal Forms

Expressions that are written differently
may nevertheless be the same,
as seen in frames 39-41.
One way of writing these expressions
is more direct than the others.

The normal form of an expression is the most direct way of writing it.

Any two expressions that are the same have identical normal forms,
and any two expressions with identical normal forms are the same.

> **Normal Forms**
>
> Given a type,
> every expression described by that type has a normal form,
> which is the most direct way of writing it.
>
> If two expressions are the same,
> then they have identical normal forms,
> and if they have identical normal forms,
> then they are the same.

> **Normal Forms and Types**
>
> Sameness is always according to a type, so normal forms
> are also determined by a type.

There might be the case where,
given `x: A` and `x: B`,
the normal form of `x` under `A`,
is different from the normal form of `x` under `B`.

> Each type can specify its own notion of equality,
> and thus the syntax of its normal forms.
>
> -- "NbE Tutorial", David.

# Definition of Value

An expression with a constructor at the top is called a value.

- Xie: The sub-expression under the constructor might be not yet value,
  thus the language can be lazy.

# Definition of Neutral

Expressions that are not values
and cannot yet be evaluated due to a variable
are called neutral.

- Xie: This definition occurs in next chapter,
  I pull it in for a compare.

# Definition of constructor

What exactly is a constructor?

Some expressions, such as `Nat` or `(Pair Nat Atom)`, are types.

Part of explaining a new type
is to say what its constructors are.
The constructor expressions are the direct ways
of building expressions with the new type.

# Values and Normal Forms

Not every value is in normal form. This is because the
arguments to a constructor need not be normal. Each
expression has only one normal form, but it is sometimes
possible to write it as a value in more than one way.

- Xie: In implementation,
  we represent "a normal expression" by "value plus its type",
  which has the potential of been further evaluated,
  and has the notation of equality (its type) with it.

# Definition of evaluation

> Finding a value that is the same as
> some starting expression is called evaluation.

Doesn't evaluation refer to
finding the meaning of an expression,
not just some simpler expression?

Not here. Expressions do not refer to some external notion of meaning
-- in Pie, there is nothing but expressions and what we judge about them.

> **Everything Is an Expression**
>
> In Pie, values are also expressions.
> Evaluation in Pie finds an expression,
> not some other kind of thing.

A normal expression has no remaining opportunities for evaluation.
Usually, expressions that are normal are easier to understand.
Finding a value is often enough, however,
because the top constructor can be used to determine what must happen next.
